welcome to topcast live I suppose I did
this yesterday so it's the second time
I'm doing a live recording of topcast
and at the end we'll do some ask me
anything questions hopefully I'm coming
through loud and clear so people can let
me know if in fact I cannot be heard or
cannot be heard clearly I've turned down
the gain a little so we say because uh I
don't know it sounded a bit to me when I
listened to back as if I was coming
through a little too loudly perhaps
today I'm reading from rather than one
of David Deutsch's Works um this here it
is a book by Paul Davies the great Paul
Davies
uh who is possibly the modern day's most
prolific science writer in terms of
certainly physics cosmology that kind of
thing
inspirational books in a different
category I often say to the style of
book and content of book that David
Deutsch writes I'm fan of I'm a fan of
them both but for quite different
reasons
on the one hand
Paul Davies began writing books back in
the 70s and his books have continued
similar themes over the years
kind of repackaging the same kind of
content with updated information about
what we've learned about the cosmos and
have learned about science
so in that sense it's almost like his
works are an ongoing set of scientific
news
um
and so I first read the mind of God back
when it was published in sort of 94 95.
he received the Templeton price for that
which is a a price that is worth more
monetarily than the Nobel Prize it's got
a religious bent but it tends to be
awarded to in the Templeton Foundation
tends to support work that
tends in the direction of the
intersection between Theology and
science
yeah
some people think that you've sold out
except a Templeton prize Grant I think
that's ridiculous of course scientists
should
take whatever money they can from
whatever sort of account the criticism
is that that if you get supported by the
Templeton Foundation then this colors
your work in some way and I just don't
think that's true the Templeton
Foundation
comes to you offering you support an
industrial place conditions upon as far
as I'm aware what you do with the money
and anyway the Templeton prize certainly
I was awarded to Paul Davis not on the
basis of him doing research but rather
him writing a book when you read the
mind of God however it's wonderful
marketing it's wonderful marketing the
word God only appears on uh about 13 or
14 pages something like that it's not
like the work is
really about the mind of God when he
uses the word god he's speaking in the
einsteinian sense Einstein didn't
believe in God he kind of used sometimes
loose language in referring to
things like the mind of God
as I substitute or synonym for
the laws of physics uh reality as a
whole that kind of thing and so learning
the mind of God just means understanding
the laws of physics in some way or other
except after all if God exists then he
has or she has it has
determine what the laws of physics are
okay well at least a creative God would
have done it
so let's begin with the reading now I
have a couple of copies of this
including one that's on the screen so
I'm not going to be reading from the the
physical book and I'm only going to read
the one chapter
all of the chapters in this book it's
it's Unique as far as Davies is
concerned because
these are more like a collection of
articles
you know like newspaper articles
um reflecting on
big questions in science
and so I won't be reading them all by
any stretch I'll do a few of these
episodes I would say because
they're very interesting they go into
some of the
more recent discoveries especially in
cosmology
this particular chapter I'm reading
today is more about the history and
science of the Big Bang leading into our
most recent understanding of the origins
of the universe
Davies
was trained in cosmology and indeed one
of his supervisors was Fred Hoyle and
he's going to mention Fred oily uh
somewhat unfairly when we get there I
might say more about this but Fred Hoyle
is often remembered popularly as that
guy who refused to ever accept the Big
Bang Fred Hoy was a great proponent of
the steady state Theory
now he was mistaken
okay
he shouldn't be remembered for what he
got wrong but while the rather for what
he got right because Fred Hall was on
the other hand also
if not the greatest astrophysicist of
the 20th century he certainly deserves
to be counted in the top
ten five perhaps because he was the guy
that explained Stellar nucleosynthesis
he explains where the elements on the
periodic table came from that's huge
he explained how you get from hydrogen
through to everything else the basic
principles is the first one to sort of
put that together yeah of course these
things are collaborations and he was
drawing on the work of other people but
he was the guy he was to
how the sun produces the energy that it
does
as Einstein was to gravity
Fred Hoyle was huge in astrophysics
sadly in cosmology
which is related to astrophysics but
it's not identical cosmology is about
the
Universe on the largest scales the what
effect space time has on the structure
of the entire universe how it's going to
evolve how it began all that sort of
stuff the origins of the universe and
the fate of the universe
it used to be the domain of Theology and
now is becoming a Precision scientist
and you can measure stuff
with high Precision Instruments inside
the instruments and we'll talk about at
least some of these today
Okay so
um The Big Bang let's read this from
what's eating the universe by Paul Davis
published just in 2021 it's as of me
giving this episode podcast uh his most
recent book as I say he's been writing
books since the 70s he's only slightly
older than David Deutsch I'm sure
they're Parts have crossed multiple
times but you know I was a great fan of
Davies and it was because Davies
appeared to be a great fan of Deutsch
that I was led to David Deutsche I've
told that story many times as well you
know the the the High Praise that David
Deutsch received from Paul Davies was
more than enough persuasion for me
okay so what does Davey say about the
Big Bang this is chapter four of book
and these are self-contained chapters
also another wonderful thing about this
book you can just pick it up and read
any particular chapter so you know
people are interested in in Popular
Science this is a great book for that
for I guess he's writing it for the
world we now live in people with shorter
attention spans as Nevada as people
don't want the book they want the blog
post and sometimes I don't want the blog
post they just want the tweet and
sometimes I don't want the Tweet just
tell them now
so 80s has gone from huge epic books
about the mind of God down to uh
discrete chapters that stand
independently one for another okay so
let's go you're right chapter four The
Big Bang
in Flagstaff Arizona there is a famous
Observatory built in 1894 by a rich
businessman Percival Lowell his plan was
to use the telescopes to look for
martians in the latter half of the 19th
century this wasn't considered totally
Off the Wall scientists openly discussed
the possibility that Mars was inhabited
and astronomers searched eagerly for
signs of life on the red planet
in 1877 an astronomer Giovanni
skipperelli said he could see straight
lines or channels on the planet's
surface and this took much speculation
about the canals of Mars Mars fever was
brilliantly captured in H.G wells's 1898
science fiction story The War of the
Worlds
fixated by the notion of Martian
Engineers Lowell embarked on his own
observations producing elaborate maps of
what turned out to be in an entirely
fanciful network of of canals end quote
okay
these Canal canals that were on the
surface of Mars there's been attributed
to a number of things perhaps to
um
skipperelli's uh imagination
again purely from his imagination or
perhaps they were artifacts on the
telescope lens
to be generous to him perhaps this is
why we say observation is theory-laden
observationist he was seeing canals that
just weren't there or canals canals what
am I thinking else canals that just
weren't there so
if your lens is scratched and you're
looking at a distant object like Mars it
might very well appear that there are
these channels these Rivers these water
carrying bodies on the surface of Mars
observation is the related what you see
is not necessarily the truth in fact
there was nothing on Mars okay so either
it could have actually been entirely
within his own mind entirely
that's why we have such a thing as
science so we can check we can check the
observations of each other
all right let's continue
David Wrights while Lowell pursued his
quixotic Quest rather more conventional
astronomy was also being conducted at
his Observatory
by the late 19th century telescopes had
Advanced to the point where they could
probe far beyond the confines of our
Milky Way galaxy
a big issue of the day concerned the
large-scale organization of the cosmos
in particular what were all those
nebulae wispy patches of light since
scattered across the sky
were they giant clouds located within
our galaxy or were they entire galaxies
in their own right too far away for the
individual stars to be discerned end
quote
why didn't they know why didn't they
know that these you know the Andromeda
galaxy for example you look at the
Andromeda galaxy it can be seen with the
naked eye it looks like a star
how could they not have known back then
that it wasn't in our own Galaxy
well because they had no method for
figuring out the distance to very
distant objects
when we want to determine the distance
to a star the first and indeed the only
direct direct way I use the word direct
provisantly but I'll get to the reasons
why in a moment I say that this is a
this is a precise method where you can
use an instrument an instrument to
determine the distance to the object
rather than making further assumptions
okay all observation is the related let
me
if you want to determine the distance to
a star
then you can use this method called
parallax
very very very very distant objects
appear to be fixed in the sky
no matter what position the Earth
occupies around the Sun
however
as the Earth does go around the Sun some
of the closer stars appear to move
and the closer stars appear to move the
most and the more distant star appear to
move to least until once you reach past
about
for ground-based telescope something
like
300 perhaps out to a thousand light
years at most
depending upon how powerful your
telescope is
you do not notice these Stars moving at
all now you can notice Parallax Yourself
by simply putting your own finger in
front of your face and looking with one
eye and comparing the position of your
finger to the background then opening it
and closing the other eye and looking at
the finger you'll see the finger appears
to move that's called The Parallax
effect exactly the same thing happens
when the earth goes around the Sun
close stars appear to move relative to
the background and the degree by which
they move can be issued so you're only
making a measurement of that angle and D
equals one over P
wonderfully simple equation the distance
in parse X and P The Parallax angle in
Arc seconds this direct relationship
that's why I say direct to measurement
so long as you can measure that angle
using an instrument okay when I say
instrument what they're doing is they
have photographic plates and they
measure how far across the sky the thing
moves okay so on and so forth but that
can tell you to high Precision how far
away these stars are okay
what do you do for all the other stars
well
here's what you can do
you can find that within your let's call
it a thousand light year radius you can
find some special Stars one group of
special stars are called the cepheid
variables
specific variables are as the name would
suggest variable Stars they expand and
contract expand and contract with a
regular period a regular period a very
regular period that can be measured you
notice the Luminosity of these things go
up and down the brightness goes up and
down up and down up and down
there is a relationship between
the period how you know frequently
they're getting brightened up right now
you're talking the order of days by the
way you know
um uh maybe it has a a brightness to
dimness sort of um period
of three days so the actual period would
be six days okay they're going from
Bright to Bright to Bright dim dim dim
there is a relationship between the
period and the inherent Luminosity
inherent brightness of these cepheid
variables
so if you've got one within the thousand
light year
limit of Parallax you can measure the
distance to it directly
and then you make a further assumption
the further assumption is
all such cepheid variables
for which you have the capacity to see
them out beyond the limit of a thousand
light years have exactly the same
properties as the saturated variables
within a thousand light years which you
know the distance to if you know the
distance to these cephe variables
number one
and you know their apparent brightness
which you know with a photo multiplier
here on the ground on Earth how bright
the thing appears in the sky
then you can determine what the inherent
brightness much but must be called the
absolute magnitude or just the
Luminosity how bright it really is
compared to something like the sun okay
if you put it in the sun side by side
you would know they're the three things
that are related the distance to the
object
the how bright it appear in the sky at
the moment and its inherent Luminosity
how bright it really is obviously a
really bright thing inherently that was
genuinely really bright if you were near
it would appear very dim if it's very
distant but we have this relationship
this relationship between
the What's called the apparent magnitude
how broad it appears the absolute
magnitude which is standardized as how
bright the thing would appear at 10
light years away
and the distance
okay these three things are related
so if you have these good distance
measurements using Parallax then you can
just make a further assumption that if
you find a cephate variable elsewhere in
the universe certainly within the Galaxy
that
given its apparent brightness you
measure the period that's easy okay you
measure the period of the thing and that
will tell you what the inherent
Luminosity of it is
so once you've got those two things the
apparent brightness easy you get that
from Earth measure the period that tells
you the Luminosity because of the period
Luminosity relationship
then you can determine the distance to
that star
so now you've got what's called a
standard candle this thing in the
universe that tells you when you find it
in a distant Galaxy how far away that
Galaxy is approximately speaking and
this is in fact what is done
sf8 variable is very good for this
understand a candle that's used
especially in cosmology trying to find
the distance to very very distant
galaxies because well eventually get to
the point where you simply can't see the
feed variables in other galaxies they're
just too far away
is a type 1A Supernova a type 1A
Supernova is a supernova with very
predictable inherent luminosity
for these things you have to do fancy
physics calculations because what's
going on is you've got a big star next
to a small star
and the big star is sucking material
from the small star it's accreting it's
collecting that material from the small
star eventually that big star goes
beyond a certain limit
of mass and that's certain limit of mass
causes it to explode as a supernova for
reasons I won't get into the full
astrophysics here but
there's a specific mass at which that
happens
a specific method which I haven't sorry
I got it around the wrong way I just
realized what am I talking about it's
the small star often a white dwarf often
it's a white dwarf that is a creating
material from the big star that's what's
going on this big star as in big is in
volume also in Mass Perhaps it is close
to this white dwarf star
and it is accreting material a creating
material collecting material from this
white wall star once the white dwarf
star exceeds a certain limit
uh I think this is called the
chandraseka limit I forget my limits yes
it is the change of second element
um once that limit is is exceeded then
the star explodes and all such white
dwarfs explode at precisely the same
mass producing exactly the same
Luminosity the same brightness so this
is a standard candle so now if you see
one of these things occur throughout the
Universe and by the way all of these
type 1A supernovae have precisely the
same light curves so they're all
different sorts of supernovae right so
how do you know you're seeing a type 1A
Supernova how do you know you're seeing
the one where it's the white dwarf
accreting material from the other big
style rather than just some random star
ending its life how can you distinguish
because you plot the Luminosity over
time of these objects and there is a
characteristic curve a specific way
in which the
the the the the the the light changes
over time it reaches the maximum and
then it falls back down again
so uh that's how we can determine the
distance to very distant galaxies
because very distant galaxies
they're going to have
um it's going to be difficult to tell
how far away they are unless you've got
something very very bright and a
supernova is extremely bright and
predictable with its light curve so
that's how we determine the distance to
distant objects
what Davies is talking about here is a
time when we didn't have these
techniques
we didn't know
enough about astrophysics to know all
this sort of stuff we knew we knew about
parallax
to once you get beyond the a thousand
light you limit approximately you don't
know how far away Things Are
so you didn't know whether or not the
Andromeda galaxy was as it is 2.2
million light years away or merely with
inside the inside the Galaxy at a mere
20 000 light years away you couldn't
distinguish between these two situations
if there's anyone there listening just
give me a sign that you can hear me
otherwise I'm I could be talking into
the ether
um
let's continue
David goes on to write quote
in 1909 a Lowell Observatory astronomer
now vesto Slifer set about examining the
quality of the light from the mysterious
nebulae the only telescope he had was a
relatively modest 24-inch instrument so
this was slow painstaking repetitive
work with no fancy electronic gizmos of
the sword astronomers have today all
observations had to be done by hand and
eye often with on-the-fly improvisations
to coax the best out of the equipment
Slither analyzed the faint nebulous
glows with a device called a
spectroscope designed to split light
into its constituent colors
he labored away night after night often
freezing conditions recording the
results on film in those days an
astronomer's lot was not a happy one
yet the compulsion that drives the
slippers of this world is that dedicated
toil in some small corner of a subject
can unexpectedly strike gold
and that's just what hand
that's just what happened at Lowell
Observatory by 1912 sliffer had
assembled enough data to conclude that
most nebulae were measurably redder in
the color
measurably redder in color than the
Milky Way why was that an explanation
was immediately apparent when a light
source is receding at great speed the
emitted light waves are stretched
Shifting the wavelength towards the red
end of the color spectrum
Slither therefore concluded that most
nebulae are rushing away from us
end quote
so um
yes
slither
made this big advance and Davis was
about to say that however however
although he was the first one to notice
these things moving away from us he
didn't know they were galaxies he didn't
know there were galaxies and so that's
that's why he isn't given the credit
that Hubble was later on but a lot of
people make a big deal about this it's
like oh Slither deserves the credit for
actually figuring out that the Universe
was expanding no no he didn't no no he
did figure out that these things had
redshift had large redshift and they're
rushing away from us but he didn't he
couldn't solve the mystery
so vesto Slifer did make these excellent
observations
but he didn't know what they meant so he
couldn't explain them this is an
important distinction to make okay so in
terms of the history let's keep going
babies goes on to say
with hindsight we can see that 1912
marked the true birth of modern
cosmology but there was no Fanfare no
press conference just a careful
technical paper buried in the
observatory's bulletin end quote well
yes and no but like why would people
have Fanfare about this it was a problem
it was a mystery no one knew
um again if they had if sliffer had have
said hey look I know that the higher
redshift means they're further away
that would have been something but he
didn't he didn't know that so all he
knew was that well he made this
measurement and made this measurement
that um that all of these objects had
rare shifts okay
David's goes on to say it took several
years of many more observations because
before sliffer's Discovery gained
prominence eventually coming to the
attention of a certain Edwin Hubble
uh a lawyer turned astronomer rarely
seen without a pipe in 1924 Hubble used
the big 100-inch telescope at Mount
Wilson in California then the world's
largest to measure the distance to the
Andromeda galaxy Andromeda nebula and
from a nebula by managing to detect
individual stars and in doing so proved
that Andromeda is in fact another entire
galaxy like the Milky Way end quote
yes so at the time when Slither did this
it was the Andromeda nebula
not the Andromeda Galaxy
but
he was able to with his with this huge
telescope 100-inch telescope discern
individual Stars
and therefore if you could discern
individual stars then well this was a
thing that was
um uh
not within our galaxy
and if you can see selfie variables he
can determine precisely
the distance
to this galaxy which is eventually done
Hubble went on to estimate the distances
to another 20 through galaxies then he
combined his results with sliffer's
redshift measurements and glimpsed the
outline of something systematic
the farther away the Galaxy was located
the rhetoric's light and the faster its
recession it seemed to be in proportion
the simplest interpretation this pattern
was that the Universe was gradually
expanding growing larger over a time
scale of billions of years end quote yes
so this can be summed up this
result is summed up in four words the
further the faster the further the
faster
so the further away a galaxy is the
faster it's moving away from us
so you go ah what's special about us why
are we you know um why is everything
moving away from us well it's not it
wouldn't matter what galaxy you're in
you would notice every galaxy moving
away from you because the entire
universe is expanding space itself is
growing in between these galaxies but
not all the galaxies some like the
Andromeda galaxy in particular is
actually moving towards us because
they're gravitationally bound gravity
when objects are close together is more
powerful for the time being
then the tendency of space to expand
so we can locally stop the expansion
space after all
space is not expanding where you are or
why where I am I'm not growing taller we
are not getting further apart uh
the intermolecular bonds of my body are
keeping me together
the expansion of space doesn't make any
difference but possibly more importantly
locally here
this space is being held together by
something like the Earth okay the
curvature of space is preventing it from
growing
okay
so Hubble Is Just
found this further the faster
proportionality this wonderful straight
line that one can draw between
redshifts and distances this uh this
relationship and Davies goes on to say
quote Hubble Julie announced his results
to the world in the New York Times on
23rd of November 1924. it was
undoubtedly one of the most momentous
discoveries of the 20th century and
plaudits were soon showered upon the
Pope's Mike Pope
and plaudits were certain showered upon
the pipe smoking astronomer leaving
vesto Slifer as the unsung hero of the
expanding universe end quite yes but
again again we have to say what he did
impressive thought was was to provide
the problem not the solution
okay yes it's important for scientists
to
come up with problems every solution
reveals a new problem okay
yeah
um he he
wondered what these things were these
nebula in the sky
vesto Slither and he by looking
encountered another problem this often
happens in in astronomy you point your
telescope somewhere and you find things
that you don't understand you encounter
more problems the invention of the
telescope solves a lot of stuff
how to see things that previously could
not be seen but then it opens up a world
of problems
like why do they all have redshift what
are these things that have redshift
all of them
problem
solution
Hubble
saying that these objects are actually
outside of our galaxy and relationship
the further away they are the faster
they're moving problem why well
expansion of space
um Davies goes on to say quote
with the realization that the Universe
isn't just there an unchanging
collection of glowing ornaments but is a
dynamic system evolving with time a host
of questions arose about its trajectory
where had this system come from and
where was it heading what determines how
fast the universe is expanding could the
expansion rate change with time
when did it begin and will it go on
forever
two implications of the expansion were
immediately obvious first if the
expansion is getting bigger it must
previously have been smaller and denser
second the effect on gravity are
Universal attractive force would act
like a break on the expansion slowing
the recession of the galaxies as they
pulled on each other
because of this deceleration the
expansion must have been faster in the
past
Hubble's observations weren't extensive
or accurate enough to detect any change
in its rate of expansion over the few
million years that they encompassed
however
the breaking effect of gravity was easy
enough to study theoretically and as
early as 1921 the Russian astronomer
Alexander Friedman had calculated
precisely how the expansion rate would
gradually slow but his deliberations
were mostly ignored
astronomers were flirting with one of
the most far-reaching discoveries in the
history of science but such was the
tentative nature of these early results
that no leading scientist was prepared
to take the plunge and stake the obvious
implication
end quote
yes so the obvious implication was that
the universe in the past was smaller and
keep on going back and past everything
was on top of everything else eventually
there was a time when the universe had
zero size
if you could extrapolate back you know
like that so
this then becomes
a problem it suggests the universe Had
An Origin in time
which seems to be
a creation event
that's a problem
after all what caused this creation
event
so who solved this who solved this this
problem
I was willing to State this well
Davies goes on to say in the event it
fell to a young Belgian priest and
theoretical physicist obey Georges
lamatri to come out and claim explicitly
in 1927 that the Universe we now observe
must have begun billions of years ago as
a cosmic a a state of enormous density
that expanded with explosive force this
was the precursor to the modern Big Bang
Theory
you might have expected that a
declaration of such profound importance
would be a scientific not to mention
theological sensation
yet again however the response was muted
Hubble himself doubted in the mantra's
conclusion
Albert Einstein by then the world's
greatest Authority on gravitational
cosmology was equally dismissive
your calculations are correct you wrote
to Le Mantra but your physics is
atrocious
Einstein is all Einstein had also
Shrugged Friedman's earlier theoretical
effort aside
and indeed he only accepted that the
Universe was actually expanding after
visiting Hubble in California in 1931
after that he did a u-turn and backed La
matra's work in spite of this
illustrious endorsement speculation
about the origin of the universe wasn't
taken very seriously in the 1930s indeed
cosmology was hardly even a recognized
subject
um yeah yeah so
Einstein seems to have not had the
courage of his convictions because
general relativity and you know he
worked with this guy called desita I
think that does now does Davies
mentioned
the sitter
there was this other physicist to sit up
it was sort of a mathematician as well
as physicist and he doesn't mention him
I don't think
um so anyway
I understand and desitter figured out
that general relativity predicted space
was not entirely stable
and so the thing should have been
contracting or expanding
uh the sitters kind of said well the
universe should be expanding
because if it was Contracting we would
have noticed
um
you know and it depends on how much mass
there is in the universe which is the
difficult thing to estimate as to
whether or not you have contraction
after a while
so anyway Einstein should have just
stuck with his own Theory
and said well what does the theory say
if the theory says that space
expands or contracts as a whole then
that's what it does
and then you go out and you
um
see what the observations tell you
and in fact of course you know we know
now hubbles observations
show that the universe is indeed
expanding the space is expanding
okay
let's go on Davey says quote
happily the theoretical work of Friedman
and lamatra wasn't gotten
though it took another two decades
before it was revivified by George
gammau
I deflector from the Soviet Union
working in the United States was an
astronomer he was a nuclear physicist it
was he who explained the type of
radioactivity known as alpha decay
Gamal reasoned that the young highly
compressed Universe must have been hot
enough to prevent nuclear reactions
consequently it would have glowed like a
furnace which raised a fascinating
possibility
might have fading remnant of that
primordial heat still pervade the
universe today forming a cosmic
background of microwave radiation end
quote Yeah wonderful Okay so
explained Alpha Decay this is where you
have heavy nuclei releasing what is
essentially
a helium nucleus now two protons and two
neutrons he two plus they come firing
out of the nucleus this is the
in one sense the least penetrating kind
of radiation so the least dangerous as
long as it's outside of your body you're
safe from it there's Alpha radiation
there's beta radiation which is a stream
of electrons it's more energetic more
dangerous
and then there's gamma radiation the
most energetic of all photons of light
at exceedingly high frequency which is
the worst of all
a nuclear bomb will produce all of these
things all these kinds of radiation uh
there's a sense in which
you know although Alpha radiation is the
least dangerous
you know as long as you know you could
be in a room of Alpha radiation sources
and you're reasonably safe in a way that
if you're in a room with gamma radiation
sources or beta radiation sources you're
not
but
if the alpha radiation gets inside you
then you're sort of trouble this is a
famous case of polonium poisoning by the
Russian government of certain people
over time they like to use polonium
because it's an alpha in Nita and uh it
can quickly disappear but if it gets in
you now sprinkle a little bit of stuff
on your food uh an awful way to die but
a very effective means of assassinating
someone
uh so not good
uh okay so could we have seen the heat
left over from The Big Bang this is what
gamma was postulating
or yes okay and uh so here we get to the
discovery of the so-called CMB Cosmic
microwave background
Davies goes on to right quote
gamma was on the right track in 1964 two
scientists working on satellite
Communications at the Bell Laboratory in
New Jersey accidentally came across as
Remnant heat bathing the universe at a
temperature of about 2.7 degrees above
absolute zero absolute zero is about
minus 273 degrees Celsius
it showed up as annoying as an annoying
history receiver all attempts to explain
it away as a defect in the equipment
including pigeon droppings in the
antenna failed yes now um and this was
called hey um a white dielectric
substance the pigeon dropping so I spent
days
trying to clean their big antenna of
pigeon droppings because they thought
that was where the interference was
coming from no they detected the heat
left over from the Big Bang
Davis goes on to say
and the only explanation left was that
disturbance came from outer space this
was a big bag of Smoking Gun
now if memory serves the story was
that
these two guys
who were awarded the Nobel Prize for
this by the way
uh it just happened to be overheard uh
at coffee one day in a cafe
by another physicist who
said that this was precisely the thing
that George Gamo had
postulated
you know that they were looking for this
heat left over from The Big Bang but
these guys not being uh
astrophysicists didn't know about it
um penzius and Wilson was their name uh
Arno penzius and some Wilson
they discovered the CMD they were the
first guys to point a
instrument at the sky and detect in all
directions there's 2.7 Kelvin
temperature so that empty space was not
completely devoid of energy but
contained heat what heat the heat left
over from The Big Bang but after 13.8
billion years it had cooled to this
obviously started off hot but now spread
throughout this vast volume of space and
stretched also by the way
that therefore you have
um
uh such a cool temperature now but it
would have been very hot in the past in
the very distant past
Davis goes on the same so after having
said he's we've found the Big Bang
Smoking Gun
Davey says quote
suddenly cosmology was propelled into
the scientific mainstream and began to
attract some of the brightest Minds in
physics and Mathematics the likes of
Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking the
origin of the universe you know Big Bang
was at least was at last taken seriously
and became the focus of intense
theoretical analysis astronomers began
to clamor for better observations of the
cosmic microwave background today
referred to Simply as the CMB confident
that it contained crucial clues about
the early universe
because of atmospheric absorption a
decent view of the CMB needs a satellite
and that's what they got in November
1989 NASA launched Kobe and with it
cosmology's golden age
and quite end of the chapter as well
um yeah the Cody was what got a fellow
called George Smoot
the Nobel Prize George Smoot had a
fairly large team
uh they launched the cosmic microwave
background Explorer satellite
that took highly precise measurements of
the cosmic microwave background that
revealed that it wasn't exactly 2.7
Kelvin in all directions because that
was a problem
solution problem solution problem the
problem was if the cosmicroad background
was uniform in all directions that's
exactly the same in all directions
at the beginning of the universe was
uniform everywhere
the the early Universe would have been
just as uniform as the Heat
left over by
so therefore why isn't the universe
uniform after all here's a planet Earth
there's a sun here's a Galaxy
and it doesn't look uniform
it looks inhomogenous heterogeneous
there are galaxies here and there are
not galaxies there that's in Hunt in
homogeneity it's not uniform
so anyway they pointed their satellite
at space you know this satellite which
was able to take
which detect microwaves
uh it's very these long wavelength waves
and measure it precisely and produce a
map of the sky and you get what are
called anisotropies if something's
isotropic it's the same old direction if
it's an isotropic it's not the same in
all directions so they found that it
wasn't the same in all directions you
know if you go down not to the first
decimal place 2.7 but you go down to
like the fourth or fifth decimal place
okay
2.701 in this direction 2702 in this
direction
um so that kind of thing
and so that's how they they figured out
that you know the the early Universe
wasn't uniform either and hence that's
why the universe now is not uniform and
why wouldn't the early Universe have
been uniform or because you've got
Quantum effects happening then when the
universe was really small these Quantum
effects mean that you can't have perfect
uniformity
you have fluctuations in everything
including the amount of energy in
different areas different regions of
space especially when the the universe
itself is smaller than an atom
Quantum effects then dominate
so we should expect
[Music]
anisotropies in homogeneous
yeah now
This was um
George Smoot was the guy as I said and
his student was Charlie lineweaver
another one of my intellectual Heroes
also happened to be a lecturer of mine
he was the guy that processed the data
Charlie line with who I've mentioned on
top cast many times before well worth
looking up Charlie line wherever and
going to his web pages he's in a very
engaging speaker and more than that his
uvoir of research
stretches across all of physics
especially technology but you know if
you're into aliens and that kind of
stuff he is he's the guy he looks into
astrobiology and that kind of thing just
very interesting areas of research
lesser known I think you should be more
well known than he is uh
and also has worked with Paul Davis and
you know the feather in my cap is I
always say I was the one who introduced
them because I saw Davies at an event
Science event went up to him because I
was a star struck
um student he was a hero of mine wanted
his autograph you know he was very
polite and asked me what I did I said I
was going to studying physics the
University of New South Wales
um Charlie lineweaver is one of my
lecturers and he said oh you know
Charlie line Weber um
so I said yes I did and so um he gave me
his card and I introduced him to Charlie
and then they went on to author papers
together
um and so now I think they still you
know they do they collaborate
they probably would have collaborated
anyway regardless of course I'd ever
been involved there like a catalyst
um
so there are a couple of other things
just to read here
um because in this chapter Davies has
two boxes two boxes of additional
information so let me read the boxes of
additional information then I'm going to
go the questions for anyone who has me
has questions for me
and the boxes of information ah
firstly the first one is titled Hubble
Wars
David's rights quote the rate of
expansion of the universe is expressed
as a number known as the Hubble constant
or H the man himself assigned HR value
of 500 in the peculiar system of units
that astronomers prefer that means a
Galaxy about 3.3 million light years
away is receiving on average at 500
kilometers per second
given H and factoring in the breaking
effect of gravity you can work out the
age of the universe
Hubble's original value put the universe
at only about 2 billion years old
less than half the age of the Earth
astronomers lifted their game and
produced estimates of H the progressive
pushed back at the inferred age but they
were divided into two warring factions
one touted a value of 180 for H and the
other one was 55 using the same methods
and each insisting that the errors in
measurement were far too small to close
the gap the discrepancy was an important
issue because the smaller the number the
greater the age of the universe in the
1980s data from the Hubble Space
Telescope put paid to The Angst H
finally came out at 73 and I compromised
making the universe 13.8 billion years
old by current estimates
but recently a new discrepancy has
surfaced measurements of H using Cosmic
microwave background data yield a value
of only 67 implying an age for the
universe of well over 14 billion years
does this suggest something seriousness
with our understanding of basic
cosmology time will tell end quote so my
thoughts on that yeah this is another
interesting problem Kobe was the first
satellite to go up there
and to produce a map of the universe
then there was W map the so-called
Wilkinson microwave and isotropy probe
which got even more detailed refined
accurate precise measurement I should
say precise non-accurate measurements of
the cosmicroad background and recently
we've had the plank Observatory as well
another satellite in space that takes
even more high resolution images with
Cosmic microwave background
okay
yeah
when you look at these
patches of light
you know it looks like a strange pattern
you can look up the plank data for the
cosmic microwave background
what they do is look at the size of
these patches and the size of these
patches tells them something about the
expansion rate of the universe and it
tells them something about
the age of the universe
uh I think that is a less precise way of
doing things so I would expect the error
there you know spot what they say to be
greater
than the error using
um the Hubble technique of the redshift
of galaxies using the original Hubble
technique
but you know there are big errors in all
of this stuff one of the other you know
concerns I've had and certainly real
astronomers have is I was talking about
type 1A supernovas earlier on
it's type 1A supernovas
are assumed throughout the Universe to
have the same Luminosity no matter where
they go off
and this is based on
you know uh
uh commutative simulations but the
computer simulations are only as good as
the data you feed into them with the
laws of physics that you have and the
initial conditions you have and so on
and so forth
but who knows
if these distant
supernova
type 1A
made of different stuff because the
universe very far away in the very early
parts of the universe consisted of
slightly different chemicals
it took a while for you know
astrophysics to produce different kinds
of chemicals and I don't think we have a
we have a good understanding but a good
enough understanding to really think
that you know all of these ways of
predicting
what should happen in the Supernova
given what the star is made out of
unnecessarily going to be equally
accurate let's say
maybe a type 1A Supernova that occurs in
the Andromeda galaxy made of Andromeda
galaxy staff
maybe we have a good understanding of
that but put the same kind of supernova
in a galaxy
3 billion light years away
the chemistry is subtly different
there's that subtle difference make a
difference too type 1A Supernova I don't
know but hypothesis
apparently they rule these things out
and I'm not entirely convinced
so yeah at the moment
there are good reasons to think that we
should expect different estimates for
um the Hubble constant
and therefore the rate of the expansion
the inverse and therefore the age of the
universe as well
but I always say 13.8 until such time as
we have you know the textbook writers
agreeing that the number needs to be
updated
the second box I'm going to read is just
a brief one
um
and we'll just go through daily says
quote
did the bank Big Bang really happen
not all astronomers accepted the link
between the cosmic expansion and an
explosive origin ironically The Familiar
moniker Big Bang was initially coined by
the British astronomer Fred Hoyle in
1949 while dismissing the idea okay
um and quote Yeah he was on a radio show
I think on the BBC
and you know he dismissed a result of
that silly Big Bang idea and so the name
stuck ironically
the guy who wasn't a pund of it named it
anyway he'll go I mean Davies goes on to
say of oil Hoyle thought lamatre's model
of a universe exploding into a into
being with nonsense and developed a
completely different interpretation of
Hubble's observations called the steady
state Theory the basic idea is that as
the universe expands the galaxies move
apart so new matter is continually
created gradually aggregating into fresh
galaxies to fill the ever-growing gaps
as a result on a very large scale the
universe would look much the same
forever
a mix of all the new galaxies sustained
by a process of continual replenishment
there will be no Beginning No End no hot
dense primordial state
Hoyle fought feastly for his theory
marshaling a band of loyal supporters
for about 20 years the two theories
rivaled each other for support but then
then the knockout blow came the
discovery of the CMB had no credible
explanation within the steady state
model and support for it rapidly
dwindled
I went to work with Hoyle in Cambridge
at this critical juncture
here was this world famous astronomer
and public celebrity known for his
science fiction novels as well as his
research strangely isolated casting
around for some way to rescue the
essence of his theory perhaps by hitting
the big bang as an interlude rather than
an absolute origin he gave up on the
idea that particles of matter were
continually created in a thin soup
throughout space in favor of
concentrated creation centers in the
1960s highly compact objects called
quasars were discovered that fling out
huge quantities of energetic material
Hoyle believed these energetic sources
were Cosmic spigots pouring brand new
matter into the universe but the
Simplicity of the original steady-state
concept was lost and in 1970 to Hoyle
resigned his chair at Cambridge in
disillusionment and became something of
a recluse
tucked away in a remote Cottage in
Cumbria where he filled his days fell
walking sniping at scientific
establishment end quote no but remember
he's a hero in astrophysics he was the
guy that explained Stellar nuclear
synthesis how the elements are produced
and by the way the steady state Theory
also couldn't explain the ratio of
hydrogen to helium to all the other
elements the fact that around about 75
74 75 of by mass of the universe is
hydrogen and 24 is helium and you know
one percent or less is the rest of the
stuff is explained by the Big Bang
it's explained by The Big Bang Theory
and The Dark Knight sky is explained by
The Big Bang Theory is the resolution of
Albus Paradox if you had the steady
stage
in this infinite universe
I was around forever how do you get
around a super bright night sky
I don't think there's an answer to that
instead he's late you know there's
Hedges and there's attempts to work
around it but the best explanation the
best explanation
is the Big Bang because it answers all
those things it explains why there's a
dark night sky it explains the Hubble
expansion it explains the
nucleosynthesis Big Bang nuclear
synthesis the ratio of hydrogen to
helium and it explains the CMB the
cosmic micro background heat left over
and um from The Big Bang
so that's that
um yeah and that is the the end of the
reading um good hour there on
Paul Davies uh what's eating the
universe
now
I have questions that I neglected to
answer from last time from Twitter
so I'm just going to go to those
uh the first of which is from tibolt uh
uh
because I I didn't answer this question
last time but but he he clarified on
Twitter and I I may have misunderstood
what he was saying so he was saying why
does why is the reach of a Theory
scientific theory
determined by it's hard to vary
characteristics
and I said it's not you know these are
independent things you know what makes a
theory a good explanation is it's hard
to varyness but
you know I use the example of my cat it
can be a good explanation that my cat is
in the other room right now
it can be a good explanation that I'm
drinking some water
these are good explanations with zero
reach but they're hard to vary
exactly how they're very the cat there's
no other place for the cat to be this
transparent liquid substance here that
isn't killing me when I take a sip
um is
is hard to vary from the fact that it's
water
the explanation that's what so no reach
what happened to varying
on the other hand any claim that's
Universal has
potentially infinite reach out to the
far reaches of the universe
Newtonian gravity is the universal law
of gravitation once you say that it
applies here on Earth it's the law of
gravity
gravity exists anywhere there's Mass it
suddenly applies throughout the entire
universe reach reach
okay but two bolt has has come back with
uh clarification
he said he was referring specifically to
a particular extract
so I'm just going to read the extract
that he provided to me
um
where he's firstly he's quoted he said
he's referring to particularly where
David says the better an explanation is
the more rigidly its reach is determined
okay
rigidly the reach is the term so the re
it's hard to vary its reach
when you have a good explanation quite
rise
so the fact that you're hard to vary
makes all parts of the theory hard to
vary every every aspect of the theory
becomes hard to vary what it says exists
what it predicts what its reach is what
it explains about reality all of that
stuff becomes hard to vary
okay but let's let's read this uh
David wrote quote
it is determined by the content of the
explanation itself the better an
explanation is
the more rigidly its reach is determined
because the harder it is to vary an
explanation
the harder it is in particular to
construct a variant with a different
reach where the larger or smaller that
is still an explanation
you guys want to say we expect the law
of gravity with the same on Mars as on
Earth because only one viable
explanation of gravity is known Ironside
general theory of relativity and that is
a universal theory
but we did not expect the map of Mars to
resemble the map of Earth because our
theories about how Earth looks despite
being excellent explanations have no
reach to the appearance of any other
astronomical object
so yeah so David's saying there the
the effect upon the reach
given how hard to vary the theory is
well I can assert any old Theory right
now
um that that has reach
Universal reach throughout the Universe
um at all points of space time there
exists
infinite fairies
and these fairies observe the con Cosmos
they don't interact by any physical
force and they can't protect it through
gravity or light or anything else
they cannot be detected but they're
absolutely crucial
for Consciousness and the capacity of
Consciousness to
give rise to everything in the universe
this is the purpose of fairies
and there's infinite of them now that
theory
is a theory with vast reach
it reaches everywhere in space but also
it reaches into everything every
Consciousness and everything that exists
how do things come into being
you think of them and the fairies that
exist everywhere bring those things into
being
ridiculous Theory why because
easy to vary bad explanation why fairies
are not name your other thing what are
the properties of these fairies
I can't test for these fairies
I've just had a pole cloth invented
fairies I could have said elves I could
have said dragons I could have said
enzymes it doesn't matter like you know
the word fairy is serving no purpose
here and indeed the theory is serving no
purpose it's not explaining anything
it's providing more problems than it
solves
but
this is the kind of theory that you get
by the way in certain versions of the
anthropic principle and so on
um
there's certain ways of thinking about
quantum theory incorrect ways
misconceived ways
that Consciousness bring the reality
into existence
I've just added fairies to it
trying to provide a mechanism they don't
provide a mechanism
but there you go so that's that's reach
but easy to vary all right so there's
one situation
but here's another okay
spice is filled with vacuum energy
at all points
and it acts to accelerate the expansion
of space
okay that's a theory
that's also testable
it has reach everywhere
throughout space but nowhere into
Consciousness it's not like
it's only confined to effects on
space-time
this by the way is one explanation
not great but it is offered as
explaining the accelerating expansion
the universe the dark energy
could be a form of vacuum energy
but the calculations don't work out okay
so it's a problem
but there is this vacuum energy right
there is this vacuum energy that exists
in otherwise empty space because you
know Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
says
that yeah you're looking at a a a very
small region of space
then within a certain time
you're not certain about what the energy
is and the energy can come in
to the part of space there's a non you
know
you can never be sure that in the region
of space you're looking at you're going
to have
Zero Energy
so all of space is permeated with some
some non-zero amount of energy
because of quantum theory
um
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle so
there it is so this might have the
effect of accelerating the expansion of
space
but it doesn't have anything to do
that's got infinite reach it's harder to
vary than certainly my original fairy my
idea but its reach is limited
its reach is limited by the fact that it
is talking about specific things about
space
and energy it's not talking about
Consciousness for example or how stars
shine let's say
okay so maybe that makes things clearer
uh I hope well we'll see someone else
asked
um
oh yeah I I posted a thing where
Jordan Pearson appeared on a Fox news
program with a fella called Tucker
Carlson
and I quota Jordan Peterson after I
listened to
what he was saying
he was talking about
his ideas is
very jungian ideas you know everything's
a story we've got narratives you know
it's a good way of looking at the Bible
and how the Bible is constructed I think
he does well on that kind of thing
these narratives contain
deep messages about
truth about how societies work
it's saying how morals work and how
relationships work
the Bible tries to get some of that
across using stories
but Jordan said you know everything's a
story everything we know is a story it's
all a story it's all this great story
in fact quote from Jordan Peterson he
said even our object level perceptions
are micro stories our object perceptions
are micro stories end quote I said this
may be taking story a little far as if
as if that's the case then those stories
are highly inexplicit which would be a
strange story to tell mainly a story we
don't know at all in other words
perception raw perception is the thing
that we try to explain but we can't
explain all of it
the very active perception
consciousnesses
is something we know we have but we
can't provide an explanation of it yet
we don't know how to describe what it's
like to see red for example or to see
the Blue Sky what does the blue sky look
like to you you just have to say it's
blue well what does your blue look like
can you convey that to me no we can't we
don't know how to describe our qualia as
we say
we use these words but I don't know if
my blue is the same as your blue and
you're read as science my red you know
kids in high school figure this stuff
out and your minds are blown
most people's minds aren't blame when
they first encounter this idea this
concept but no matter how life how long
your life goes on it appears as though
you don't get any resolution to this
particular question
how do we know
that we're perceiving the world
in the same way
to some extent we know we aren't we're
in a different place and space for one
thing but also we've probably got
different
receptors in our eyes slightly different
so my Blues might appear different to
your Blues but how different how
different I don't know
where to communicate this no way to
experience what someone else is
experiencing
so if that's a story it's a highly
inexplicit one I'm saying it's a story
told not using words
so I don't think everything's a story
and I think this is related to this idea
that I was speaking about yesterday
where the author I was talking about was
trying to say everything's fiction
when you draw a picture of dinosaur to
fiction
but if a picture of a dinosaur is a
and the picture of a dragon is a fiction
what do we say about the distinction
between those two things
because they're not both not entirely
the same kind of fiction
one's purely of the imagination and the
other one is constrained by evidence
in the same way if everything's a story
well how do we distinguish between
stories of fiction
and stories about fact
we need to be able to have a
more fine-grained higher resolution
understanding of these particular
Concepts casting everything is a story
can be misleading
it it suggests that there's a
subjectivity to a whole bunch of things
in reality but there's not there's
subjectivity when it comes to fiction
and myth and so on and easy to varyness
about that that isn't the same when it
comes to
giving an account of physical reality
so that's one thing
okay
um
now someone has asked me when I upon
saying that
um William William was asked but where
would you categorize the story of Newton
sitting under a tree is it perception or
a story okay so that is certainly a
story and many think that it wasn't true
in fact that's not how he came up with
gravity
yeah we know that he was working on
specific problems to do with Celestial
Dynamics we know that he was considering
the work of Kepler and others and trying
to figure out the mathematical
relationship for gravity
it wasn't just
looking at Apples flowing from apple
trees so that's just a story that's
possibly apocryphal in other words false
um he was able to explain why eventually
apples fell to the ground not only that
but predict
using his law
at right that would fall to the ground
okay
moving on
someone has
um
provided me with a a thread and asked me
for my take on the thread and I haven't
got that
so let me read
it's about the
AI thing sort of
but I'm not going to mention the AI
thing because there's something else a
person has asked
a fella called Arthur has said
quote
for the longest time I found it weird
udkowski would focus on spreading good
epistemology as an instrument as an
instrumental goal towards reducing AI
risk the connection felt so remote and
the idea was that this needed this was
needed so dire this need was so dire
after recent online arguments on the
topic oh
um so this is
that that that's talking about
udkowski and he apparently used to
spread good epistemology
um I'll look you know he has a version
of rationality which I think is very
similar to pinkers and I don't think
it's correct I don't think it is good
epistemology it's epistemology it's
better than nonsense but you know he's
amazing and through and through
um
and you'd ask you like so many bayesians
they become Prophets
they think they have confidence in the
future and they think they can calculate
their way to a future they never
understand that you cannot predict the
growth of knowledge you can't you just
can't do it
but they don't take these ideas
seriously and so because they don't they
predict seeing all problems without the
solutions and fall into pessimism
well there we go
okay but anyway someone has responded to
this
um uh Brendan has responded to that
tweet saying what's the tldr too long
didn't read and what convinced you of
the strong connection rather than the
remote connection and Arthur has
responded the number of times people
bring up popper two or three messages in
the conversation and
um
and and then he goes on to say we figure
things out by building models of the
world
confronting them confronting conforming
them I suppose but he said oh no
confronting them to reality and refining
them as we go Papa tried to formalize
this properly but failed and educated
people sometimes uses takes to argue
silly things end quote okay so there's a
few problems there one
this building of models or explanations
which then confront the world in reality
is precisely the thing that popper
explained
this was conjecture and refutation he's
just saying conjecture and refutation
using different words conjecture
building a model of the world
confronting them into reality and
refining them as we go refutation or
attempt to refutation
so that is Papa
tried to formalize this properly and
failed what does formalize mean he
certainly didn't try and
mathematizer
you just explain this is the way
knowledge
creation works
educated people sometimes just use this
takes to argue silly things
I don't know who these are maybe David
Deutsch has finally gained so much Fame
that you know because he's the only one
out there I don't see anyone else
arguing
about I'm gonna say arguing discussing
the issue of AGI and invoking Papa and
even then I don't think he invokes his
name very often he just explains
epistemology
in the papyrian sense
and maybe he's been cast as one of these
educated people
but he's he's a unicorn
as far as I can tell yeah the
exceedingly rare person you don't see
other David deutsches out there I don't
see people invoking Papa I do naval does
David does
there's a few of us now that talk about
conjectural knowledge and how
one is not entitled to be confident
about doomsday Prophecies of anything
but not least
um
the not least when it comes to things
like AGI and AI
so yeah that's an issue
um
one more question one more question
comes from YouTube it's from John Julius
John Mora and he's asked
what's your thoughts on difference
between education and indoctrination
where truth being rational objective are
getting blurred and always redefined
mostly for their own personal biases
end quote yep okay so that's the
question
um
all education in the modern sense is
indoctrination that doesn't mean that
it's useless but it does mean that
children are required to learn
particular lessons
and tested upon them
so that's indoctrination
there's pass and fail
the genuine educational where a student
is allowed to choose what they want
to learn at all times
everyone wants to learn to talk and so
they do they want to communicate
these days everyone wants to learn to
type and read because you need it in
order to understand what's happening on
the screens that you are using every day
many students student Association many
people growing up now want to learn to
code so they can literally build stuff
using that device they can hold my hands
the phone or the computer
so this is all going on
um and but school is still there you
know moving at the glacial pace
um
truth being rational and objective are
getting blurred and always redefined
yeah in education
um yeah that of course they're still
teaching via the old
tropes we're giving you the truth we're
being rational we're being objective yes
um I agree yeah so this is the problem
with modern education and with
especially tertiary education in
particular
these incorrect ways of understanding
how critical thinking Works how
philosophy Works how knowledge is
generated and so they fall back on
not quite ancient but certainly
classical ideas about knowledge they
haven't been updated with popper and
Deutsch which goes back to that you know
previous person who is sort of having a
swipe it popper and saying that you know
he he failed he tried to formalize this
properly but failed people never engage
with Papa they just cast stones all they
do is they insult him without ever
quoting the man in his own words
where did he try and formalize this
properly how did he fail now it's just
an assertion this is the quality this is
the quality of criticism that you get
online against popper it's a shame
that's a shine
um
I've just noticed that just very
recently in the last few minutes a fella
called Roshan Ali on Twitter has asked
me
he's written a series of tweets I'll
read the series tweets and I'll answer
this and that that will be it for today
but the series of tweets are
any exam or test whose answers are known
and fixed AI will do faster and better
as it improves than people
it's the things we can't test for whose
answers are not known or have massive
scope for improvement which I can't do
if it can it'll be AGI
for example we don't know what makes
good fiction so we can't test it
so AI can't write good fiction we don't
know the content future knowledge so we
can't test for it so AI can't come up
with new theories
is this right David yeah absolutely I
completely agree with all of that
um
as soon as the thing starts to
come up with
new knowledge
new explanations
not just
versions of pre-existing explanations
but new explanations then we're going to
be in the presence of an AGI
and it's going to explain its own
internal States
and yeah but before we get there we're
going to have a plan for an AGI
and even you know playing with chat gpt4
today
and still it's making
the same kind of errors as 3.5 it's
clearly got a
bigger database it's more impressive but
still
we're not saying new explanation soon
okay that will do us for today
gone for over an hour
um more again I would say
um this time tomorrow but until then
um I'll be George you goodbye
thank you